Now that we conceptually understand the architecture of the warehouse
and the modeling practices in a data warehouse,
let's take a look a little bit at the technologies of the storage.
So, delivering the analytics to users.
Data is available in an understandable and performant dimensional model.
We got that with conformed dimensions or separate data marts,
and users can report and visualize
these by interacting directly with the model or in most cases,
through a BI application.
You will see that OLAP cubes is a very convenient way for slicing, dicing,
and drilling down, as we explained in the OLAP cubes part.
The idea is how do we serve these OLAP cubes.
So, we have two actually approaches to serve the OLAP cubes.
The first one, the tradition one was
to pre-aggregate the OLAP cubes and save
them on a special purpose non-relational database.
That's known as the MOLAP approach or the multidimensional OLAP.
Actually, you would go and buy a product that's called an OLAP server.
An OLAP server would actually be a product which is not a relational database.
It has an internal structure optimized for serving OLAP cubes,
and it is there for most major vendors.
As relational databases became more mature and more sophisticated, people said, "Okay.
Well, we can just compute the OLAP cubes on the fly or make them materialized views,
but we can serve them also from relational databases."
That's the more kind of popular approach right now,
and it's known as ROLAP.
To distinguish it from the main thing is
the technology we're using to serve the OLAP cubes post-aggregation.
Another important thing is the columnar formats.
We're going to demonstrate for you to
get the feeling of that the idea of a columnar format.
In a columnar format, actually,
data is stored in rows and not columns.
So, when you load data from disk,
you actually load one column.
So, you consume way less memory,
and let alone accessing the disk.
So, you don't need to load the whole row to be able to get one value from it.
In our upcoming demo,
we're going to do this.
We're going to construct the same table once
the columnar format and the other time without
the columnar format and test the difference.
I'm here referring to the Kimball and the Inmon books,
and also referring to a book that I like by Rainardi,
that's actually simplifying and collecting lots of the concepts from other people's work.